---
title: Etrian Odyssey Short Story
date: 2025-03-09 11:08 -1600
category: [Short Stories]
tags: [Etrian Odyssey, OCs, Slice of Life]
toc: false
---

### NOTE: Until I can properly set up the character sheet, any and all info related to my EO1 guild will be seen [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1bjXKxNo5vOA4pxOSgpujhLVlAD9NwtWBKuevqEfeGFc/edit?usp=drive_link) and [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ipAn9_p-v9w3_HAMCW8JgTZ6jt7oCDt6N42_HzeHlpI/edit?usp=drive_link)

## Alicia & Aya's Day Out

Within the outskirts of Etria, there lies a grove not too far off the town and the Yggdrasil Labyrinth. Very little critters, specifically the harmful ones, make this hobble their residence, presenting a perfect spot for anyone to visit for suits their needs. It’s here where Alicia, Guild Xenoeas’s prime archer and survivalist, has tended to troubadour Aya’s training with the bow, one of their activities to participate in during their off period. Her instinct for gauging Aya’s potential was a cross between a reasonable assumption, and a frugal handover; it’s not like they could’ve gotten a profit from the Wood Bow, not to mention gazing at the dancer’s support numbers seemed eerily reminiscent as to the type of maneuvers she once partook in, so it was the best solution and a sufficient way to bolster the team’s capabilities. After finishing up one of her latest dance routines, Aya perks up a response. “You know, I must say I sure am glad you’re helping me out with this whole bow-in-target practice, Alcy. I never thought I’d be fit with these strings!”

Alicia, sitting on a field of grass a few feet away, shuffles around with an inquisitive look. Noticing this, Aya continues, “Well, I usually stick with small knives, keenly tucked away so as to not be conspicuous during my dazzling routines, should one be so… utterly captivated by it. Although unfamiliar, I assume this is a feeling you endure, correct? Coupled with all the shows I’ve done prior to this engagement, such an opportunity was scarcely available…” Alicia, beginning to stand upright and brushing off the small grass stains on her skirt, nods her head slightly. Once done, and after gesturing to Aya that it was time to start, she then hops straight over to a tree branch several feet from where the two were at, planting small, circular pieces of wood at the end. “A little higher than that, Alcy, lemme see if I can show off my training a little” was slyly commented. Upon apathetically following the request, she begins to head behind Aya. Everything ready, she begins to steady her arm, draws a sharp breath, and then…

**THWACK**

Once brought back for a close inspection, the two gaze plainly at the arrow’s place; not too far off the center, just within the cusp of the first area. “Ehehehe… I didn’t think that would work?” Aya sheepishly admits. “I figured it was better to tighten my forearms to avoid the string’s bounce back, as well as curl my fingers just a smidge more.. think I should focus on tidying up these areas?” Alicia nods her head approvingly, though Aya could’ve sworn she caught a glimpse of a faint smile. Brushing it aside, she continues, “Y’think it’s alright for us to go back to town for a break? We still have our reserve money an-”

Without warning, Alicia stares coldly and disapprovingly. Realizing what this is about, Aya retorts “HEY! Don’t assume I’ve forgotten the guild’s unified principle: anyone wishing to procure the Ental for personal use must abide by a 10-15% cut, then be able to pay it up after through whatever means, or hold back from another offering til the net amount or higher is pooled! I’ve followed it to a tee!”

She still stares, though this time with a raised eyebrow and demeaning allure, swallowing the distance between them.

“...OK, so MAYBE I indulged and took 20% when Sir Iron wasn’t looking!”

Closer…

<sub>“...25%...”</sub>

Discontent, Alicia heavily sighs, pondering why it had to be today of all days. “W-w-wait," Aya stammers, "listen, this was before you piqued my interest in another training session, alright? I’ll cover whatever you want as an apology and uh, any lashing from the rest of the group.” Alicia rolls her eyes, yet doesn’t make any resisting gesture, going over to grip her satchel and Aya’s pack, as the exasperated songstress begins to ruminate. Something the two can do with this much cash on hand, and more importantly, be able to participate or give as a suitable apology… once donning her pack, it dons on her: “Oh! Didn’t some stalls open up for the limited fair? Let’s peruse what they have available before the day’s over, there’s bound to be some extravagant items to pick up! We - well, I - might even be able to concoct a prank for Sensu… Come on!” She quickly yet gleefully grasps Alicia’s arm around the middle, shocking the reserved mute as they make their way back to the town square.

Once they had arrived, it was astonishingly calm, rarely populated by newcomers and/or feverish traders. Both had feared they missed the event, but a few participants such as Shilleka were quick to point out that it’s still ongoing, just that not many come during the late afternoon. Getting some pointed recommendations, the two head off, circling each stall one after another for any particular highlights. A stall with jewelry, another with small instruments, but they only stopped at the one pertaining to different herbal remedies, beaming Aya as she starts investigating the stocks for purchase. As this was happening, Alicia noticed around the corner a floral standee. Slowly making her way over, she noticed all kinds of flora being hung or placed within the display stands, making slow gazes to each as the stallholder quietly waters them. “Welcome! Feel free to look around, and don’t be afraid to ask questions if you have any!” Bowing in respect, Alicia surveys for any noteworthy plants, and halts at a peculiar bundle: four fandango-blotted flowers, blooming within the constricted pot, and just within the width and height restrictions to be able to keep in her inn’s room. 

“Oh!” the stallholder exclaims, “that’s a real beaut, innit? This one’s a peony, and though they ain’t a perennial type, they’ll at least keep you company for a good few years.” After being gestured on the topic of outlines necessary to keep it alive, the clerk responds “Welllllllllll, outside the usual pruning and dividending each stem, I should tell you to keep watch on the height of the stalk; these ones are different from the typical bush peonies, meaning they require a bit more attention in stalk management and weekly feeding than usual. Also, just be sure there’s no form of fungal rot every now and then, it tends to get overrun by them if anything happens with either the soil or watering them.” As Alicia nods and reaches for her pouch, she halts in disarray, remembering she can’t spend her Ental unless she wants to sink the overall funds further down. Sulking, she once again bows and proceeds to shake hands as an apology. “Don’t worry about it, it’s fine! I unfortunately won’t be able to stick around once twilight comes around, but if you or someone else affiliated with you happens to come by then, I’ll have it available”. Marginally feeling better, she gives an approving grunt, and sulks away.

After benching about the plaza, glum about her predicament, she looks up and notices the orange-hued sky dwindling. Turning tail, she begins to head back to the inn, figuring Aya would be able to know to go back once she-

“AAAAALLLLLLCCCCCCCYYYYYYYYYYY”

Sharply turning around, Alicia notices Aya… slowly and carefully carrying a book, three sets of herbs, and something else she can’t quite make out. Catching up so as to not cause any other scene from the shriek, she stares plainly into the irritant-burning pupils beholden to her. “You know, I don’t exactly mind the fact that you ran off, but it’d be nice if you had bothered to attain a meet-up spot, after ***nearly four and a half hours have passed***. Who’d know what’ll occur to me and my absent-minded frills?” the dancer spouted. Rolling her eyes, Alicia picks up the object with her left hand and holds the book right-side up on the other. Then, she realizes something… without missing a beat, Aya perks back up, “I only barely caught you leaving the floral shoppe at the corner of my eye, so once I picked up what I had, I hobbled over. The owner there didn’t exactly believe me when I told him we were together, so I had to slightly flub my way into procuring the peony for you. I’m not wrong to assume that’s why you were upset at my miscreancy?” Startled, she violently yet cautiously nods her head, then turns her eyes onto the book. “That one, admittedly, was a whim. I wanted to pick up something regarding tea and herbal brewery, and a book stall a ways away had exactly what I needed. After making some room to put it in for lighter carry, that botanist encyclopedia happened unto me, making it yet another perfect apologia - barely managed to pick it up though, I had to do some honest haggling, hehe!” Flushed, Alicia quickly turns away, avoiding any impending stares. The songstress, wanting to de-escalate, attempts to turn this back around in a practical manner: “Honestly… I wouldn’t mind helping you out with taking care of that. I’m not too familiar with floras and faunas myself, but considering their wonderful and hilarious application variety, it can help with figuring out material and/or an eyecatching flourisher. Besides, being taught about flower raising would be…” quieting down, she whispers “kind of cool, if it’s you doing it.”

Uncharacteristically, Alicia freezes, dazed in confusion. It wasn’t the first time she was asked to tutor something outside of archery, but it was the first time someone took an interest in her fascination beyond the laborial line of grunt work. “S-S-S-Snap out of it!” a flustered Aya yelps, “It’s just, I need to find a suitable, soothing break. Drinking tea with Poyo and Orchid’s nice and all, but it’s not quite the same. One’s not able to catch up with me for obvious reasons, and the other is, er, more on a habitual wavelength, I guess to put it? And don’t even mention Sensu; as adequate as he is, my gut places him more in the ‘has to be beneficial in my fashion’ mentality”. Refreshing her head, Alicia nods profusely. There was more to lay in the topic, but both decided to save it for the future. Pacing conjointly, Aya prattles on about what the three remedies she bought are able to do, all while Alicia listens in diligently, carefully making sure the peony doesn’t become ruined as they make their way back. Once they enter the inn, Aya gets chewed out by a furious Soejima and lackadaisical Walker, while Alicia puts her presents down, grabs her Ental allowance from the satchel and settles it onto the nearby table, continuing up the stairs with her remaining items in tow as the three bicker. Entering her room, she places the book down near her chair, and the flower upon the desk, she lays in her bed in preparation of drifting away, as the same faint smile from before glistens again as the now encroaching moonlight illuminates.
